README 1 – Data Preprocessing
📌 Overview

This module handles data loading, cleaning, transformation, and preparation of the Iris dataset for machine learning tasks including clustering, classification, and association rule mining. The preprocessing steps ensure that the dataset is standardized, consistent, and model-ready.

📂 Dataset Description

The Iris dataset contains 150 flower samples across 3 species:

Iris setosa

Iris versicolor

Iris virginica

Features:

Sepal Length

Sepal Width

Petal Length

Petal Width

Species (class label)

🔧 Preprocessing Steps
1. Load Dataset

The dataset is loaded via:

from sklearn.datasets import load_iris


Converted to a pandas DataFrame for analysis.

2. Missing Value Checks

Even though no missing values exist in the Iris dataset, validation is done:

df.isnull().sum()


This guarantees integrity before training.

3. Feature Scaling (Min-Max Normalization)

Scaled to range 0–1 using:

MinMaxScaler()


This ensures equal feature influence for models like K-Means, KNN, and PCA.

4. Label Encoding

Species labels are kept as integers (0, 1, 2).
Optionally converted to one-hot encoding for algorithms requiring binary vectors.

5. Train–Test Split

A reusable function splits the data into 80% training and 20% testing for classification tasks.

📤 Outputs

X_scaled: normalized features

y: encoded species labels

X_train, X_test: prepared splits

df: cleaned DataFrame

🎯 Purpose

The preprocessing pipeline guarantees:

Clean and usable data

Standardized feature scales

Compatibility with clustering, classification, and rule mining models

A reproducible workflow

README 2 – K-Means Clustering
📌 Overview

This module applies K-Means clustering on the preprocessed Iris dataset to discover natural groupings of flowers without using labels. The clustering is evaluated and visualized to understand cluster quality and separability.

🔧 Methods Used
1. K-Means Clustering (k = 3)

Since the Iris dataset has three species, the algorithm is run with:

KMeans(n_clusters=3)


Cluster labels are compared to ground truth using:

Adjusted Rand Index (ARI)

2. Experimentation (k = 2 and k = 4)

Additional runs with k = 2 and k = 4 evaluate over- and under-clustering.

3. Elbow Method

An inertia plot from k = 1 to k = 10 identifies the optimal cluster number.

4. Visualizations

Scatter plot: Petal Length vs Petal Width

PCA 2D visualization of clusters

Centroid patterns (via K-Means results)

📈 Evaluation
Adjusted Rand Index (ARI)

Measures similarity between predicted clusters and true species labels.
Typical ARI ≈ 0.6–0.75, indicating strong clustering despite class overlap.

Elbow Curve

Shows a clear bend at k = 3, confirming three natural clusters.

🎨 Visualizations Produced

Elbow Curve

Petal Length vs Petal Width cluster scatter plot

PCA 2D Projection of clusters

📌 Interpretation Summary

Setosa clusters cleanly due to strong feature separation.

Versicolor and Virginica overlap more, creating some misclusterings.

K-Means performs well on normalized features.

PCA visuals confirm one distinct and two semi-overlapping clusters.


README 3 – Classification & Association Rule Mining
📌 Part A – Classification
Overview

This module trains and evaluates supervised machine learning models to classify Iris species.

🔧 Models Used
1. Decision Tree Classifier

Trained on X_train and evaluated on X_test.
Metrics computed:

Accuracy

Precision

Recall

F1-Score

Classification Report

The tree is visualized using:

plot_tree()

2. KNN Classifier (k = 5)

Used to compare performance with the Decision Tree.

Comparison is based on:

Accuracy

Precision

Recall

F1-Score

📌 Summary of Findings

KNN (k=5) often performs slightly better due to smooth, distance-based classification.

Decision Tree provides higher interpretability but may overfit.

Both models achieve 93–100% accuracy on Iris dataset.

📌 Part B – Association Rule Mining
Overview

Synthetic transactional data is generated to simulate a small retail environment. Association rule mining is applied using the Apriori algorithm.

🛒 Synthetic Data Generation

20–50 transactions

3–8 items per basket

Items drawn from a pool of 20 grocery items

Patterns intentionally added (e.g., {milk, bread}, {beer, diapers} co-occurrences)

Generated using:

random.sample()
random.choices()

🔧 Apriori Algorithm

Using mlxtend, frequent itemsets are mined with:

min_support = 0.2

Association rules generated using:

min_confidence = 0.5

Rules are sorted by lift, and the top 5 strongest rules are displayed.

📈 Interpretation Example:

A rule such as:

{beer} → {diapers}


implies:

Strong customer buying pattern

Useful for product placement, cross-selling, and promotions

High lift indicates the combination occurs more often than random chance

📤 Outputs

Frequent itemsets

Association rules (support, confidence, lift)

Top 5 strongest rules

Business interpretation
